Developer Guide
===============

This section is for anyone who wants to understand or contribute to
ProvSQL's internals.  It complements the Doxygen API reference with
explanations of design decisions, data flow, and extension points that
are not apparent from the code alone.

The primary reference for the system design is the ICDE 2026 paper
:cite:`sen2026provsql`.

Chapters
--------

:doc:`architecture`
   High-level overview: how the extension is loaded, how its C and |cpp|
   components fit together, and how data flows from an SQL query to a
   provenance evaluation result.  Covers the :cfunc:`constants_t` OID
   cache and the :cfunc:`gate_type` enum.

:doc:`query-rewriting`
   Detailed walkthrough of :cfile:`provsql.c` -- the planner hook,
   the :cfunc:`process_query` function, and every phase of query rewriting
   (CTE inlining, set operations, aggregation, expression building,
   splicing, ``HAVING``, where-provenance, ``INSERT ... SELECT``).

:doc:`memory`
   How provenance circuits are persisted across transactions via
   memory-mapped files, the background worker architecture, IPC via
   anonymous pipes, and the shared-memory coordination layer.

:doc:`adding-semiring`
   The ``Semiring<V>`` interface, walkthroughs of the Boolean and
   Counting semirings, and a step-by-step guide for adding a new
   semiring to ProvSQL.

:doc:`adding-aggregate`
   The aggregation pipeline, what is generic and what is hardcoded,
   and a step-by-step guide for adding a new aggregate function
   (e.g., ``STDDEV``).

:doc:`adding-probability-method`
   The probability-evaluation dispatcher in :cfile:`probability_evaluate.cpp`,
   an overview of the existing methods, and a step-by-step guide for
   plugging in a new one.

:doc:`testing`
   How ProvSQL's ``pg_regress``-based test suite works, how to write
   new tests, the external-tool skip pattern, and how to read test
   failures.

:doc:`debugging`
   Debug builds, the ``provsql.verbose_level`` GUC, circuit inspection
   SQL functions, circuit visualization, and GDB tips.

:doc:`build-system`
   The two-Makefile structure, PGXS integration, PostgreSQL version
   guards, generated SQL files, ``make website`` / ``make deploy``,
   ``release.sh``, and CI workflows.


Documenting Your Code
---------------------

ProvSQL's API reference is auto-generated by Doxygen from comments
embedded in the source.  Every new public (or otherwise non-trivial)
function, type, class, and SQL function should carry a documentation
comment.  The prevailing style is JavaDoc (``/** ... */``) using the
standard Doxygen tags:

- ``@brief`` -- one-line summary (required);
- ``@param`` / ``@return`` -- parameters and return value;
- ``@file`` -- at the top of each source and header file;
- ``@defgroup`` / ``@ingroup`` -- used in :sqlfile:`provsql.sql`
  to organise SQL functions into logical groups.

Existing files provide good templates: :cfile:`provsql.c` for C
code, :cfile:`BooleanCircuit.h` for |cpp| classes, and
:sqlfile:`provsql.sql` for SQL functions.  Note that
:sqlfile:`provsql.sql` is generated by the Makefile from the
``sql/provsql.*.sql`` sources (see :doc:`build-system`) -- edit
those, not the generated file.

When a new SQL function is intended for users, also add an entry to
``_SQL_FUNC_MAP`` in ``doc/source/conf.py`` and reference it from
the user guide with the ``sqlfunc`` role; the coherence checker
(``check-doc-links.py``) run at the end of ``make docs`` will flag
missing or broken references.  Likewise, reference new C/|cpp|
functions, classes, and files from the developer guide with the
``cfunc`` and ``cfile`` roles, adding entries to ``_C_FUNC_MAP`` as
needed.

The coherence checker does not enforce that newly added code carries
Doxygen comments at all -- adding them is a convention the project
relies on developers to uphold.
