Testing
=======

ProvSQL's test suite uses PostgreSQL's ``pg_regress`` framework.
All tests are **integration tests** that run SQL against a live
PostgreSQL instance with the ProvSQL extension loaded.


Test Layout
-----------

::

   test/
   ├── schedule.common   # Test schedule for all PostgreSQL versions
   ├── schedule.14       # Additional tests for PostgreSQL >= 14
   ├── schedule          # Generated: concatenation of the above (gitignored)
   ├── sql/              # Input SQL scripts (one per test)
   │   ├── setup.sql
   │   ├── add_provenance.sql
   │   ├── sr_boolean.sql
   │   └── ...
   └── expected/         # Expected output (one per test)
       ├── setup.out
       ├── add_provenance.out
       ├── sr_boolean.out
       └── ...

- ``test/sql/<name>.sql`` -- the SQL statements to execute.
- ``test/expected/<name>.out`` -- the expected ``psql``-style output.
  This includes both SQL commands echoed back and their results.
- ``test/schedule.common`` / ``test/schedule.14`` -- the source schedules.
  ``test/schedule`` is generated from them by the Makefile and is
  gitignored; edit the source files instead.


The Schedule File
-----------------

Each line in ``test/schedule.common`` (or ``test/schedule.14`` for tests
that require PostgreSQL 14+) is either a comment (``#``) or a
``test:`` directive listing one or more test names:

.. code-block:: text

   # Basic checks
   test: provenance_in_from identify_token subquery create_provenance_mapping

   # Introducing a few semirings
   test: sr_formula sr_counting sr_boolean sr_why

Tests on the **same line** run in parallel.  Tests on **different lines**
run sequentially.  The first test (``setup``) creates the test schema
and tables; all subsequent tests depend on it.


Running Tests
-------------

.. code-block:: bash

   # Full suite (requires PostgreSQL superuser and extension installed)
   make test
   # or equivalently:
   make installcheck

   # With a specific PostgreSQL port
   make installcheck EXTRA_REGRESS_OPTS="--port=5434"

The test runner creates a temporary database ``contrib_regression``,
runs all tests from the schedule, compares actual output to expected,
and reports differences.


Writing a New Test
------------------

1. **Create the SQL file** ``test/sql/<name>.sql``.  Write the SQL
   statements that exercise the feature you are testing.  Include
   ``SET`` commands if needed (e.g., ``SET search_path TO public, provsql;``).

2. **Generate expected output**.  Run the test once and capture the
   output:

   .. code-block:: bash

      # Run the specific test (after make install and server restart)
      make installcheck EXTRA_REGRESS_OPTS="--schedule=test/schedule"

   Then copy the actual output to the expected file:

   .. code-block:: bash

      cp /tmp/tmp.provsqlXXXX/results/<name>.out test/expected/<name>.out

   Review the expected output to make sure it is correct.

3. **Add to the schedule**.  Insert a ``test: <name>`` line in
   ``test/schedule.common`` (or ``test/schedule.14`` for tests that
   require PostgreSQL 14+) at an appropriate position.  Place it
   after any tests it depends on (e.g., after ``setup`` and
   ``probability_setup`` if your test uses probabilities).  Do not
   edit ``test/schedule`` -- it is generated by the Makefile.

4. **Run the full suite** to verify nothing is broken:

   .. code-block:: bash

      make test


Optional-Tool Skip Pattern
--------------------------

Some tests depend on external tools that may not be installed (e.g.,
``c2d``, ``d4``, ``dsharp``, ``minic2d``, ``weightmc``).
To make these tests pass regardless of whether the tool is present,
use psql's ``\if`` with a backtick-evaluated shell command:

.. code-block:: psql

   \if `which d4 > /dev/null 2>&1 && echo true || echo false`
   -- test body that requires d4
   SELECT probability_evaluate(provenance(), 'compilation', 'd4') ...;
   \else
   \echo 'SKIPPING: d4 not available'
   \endif

Then provide two expected-output files:

- ``test/expected/d4.out`` -- the output when ``d4`` **is** available
  (the normal test results).
- ``test/expected/d4_1.out`` -- the output when ``d4`` **is not**
  available (just the skip message).

``pg_regress`` tries all ``_N.out`` alternatives and passes if the
actual output matches any of them.


Reading Test Failures
---------------------

When a test fails, ``pg_regress`` writes a diff to a temporary file:

::

   /tmp/tmp.provsqlXXXX/regression.diffs

This file shows a unified diff between expected and actual output for
each failing test.  ``make test`` will display the path to this file
and open it in a pager.

Common causes of failure:

- **UUID values**: provenance UUIDs are random and must never appear
  in expected output.  Project away the ``provsql`` column before
  comparing, and make tests depend on provenance *content* by
  evaluating it in a semiring (e.g., :sqlfunc:`sr_boolean`,
  :sqlfunc:`sr_counting`), displaying the symbolic representation
  (via :sqlfunc:`sr_formula`), or
  computing a probability.
- **Symbolic representation ordering**: when the symbolic
  representation is computed over a ⊕ (or other associative /
  commutative) gate, the order in which children are visited is not
  deterministic.  Tests that print symbolic representations must
  normalize the ordering before comparison.  The idiomatic pattern
  is a ``REPLACE`` or ``REGEXP_REPLACE`` that rewrites any variant
  orderings to a canonical one.  See ``test/sql/union.sql`` and
  ``test/sql/distinct.sql`` for examples.
- **Floating-point precision**: probability results may differ slightly
  across platforms.  Use ``ROUND()`` in tests.
